Create ProvenHeaders.md (#2679)
stratisproject/StratisBitcoinFullNode: Documentation/ProvenHeaders.md

# ProvenHeaders specifications
## Table of contents

- [Problem overview](#problem-overview)

- [Solution abstract overview](#solution-abstract-overview)

- [Basic constructs](#basic-constructs)

- [Structure of proven header](#structure-of-proven-header)

- [Assumptions](#assumptions)

- [Best chain selection](#best-chain-selection)

- [Changes required for the C# node](#changes-required-for-the-c-node)

  ​

## Problem overview

> Syncing with headers is used for quick blockchain download. Node can ask its peers for headers using *getheaders* message and asked peer will send up to 2000 headers per *headers* message. When the headers are received they are used in order to ask peers for blocks that are represented by those headers. This protocol is new and used on bitcoin network because it has some advantages in terms of resources usage over using *inv* messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Syncing with headers is used for quick blockchain downloads. A node can ask its peers for headers using *getheaders* message and the asked peer can send up to 2000 headers per *headers* message. When the headers are received, they are used in order to ask peers for blocks those headers represent. This protocol is new and used on bitcoin network because it has some advantages in terms of resources usage over using *inv* messages.
```

> On PoW chains headers can't be easily faked because creating a valid header requires spending a lot of hashing power to meet the PoW difficulty target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On PoW chains, headers can't be easily faked because creating a valid header requires spending a lot of hashing power to meet the PoW difficulty target.
```

> On PoS networks like Stratis it is easy to construct a fake chain of headers of any length and almost arbitrary chainwork. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On PoS networks like Stratis, it is easy to construct a fake chain of headers of any length and almost arbitrary chainwork. 
```

> With our C# node implementation, if an attacker constructs a fake chain of headers that has more work than the valid chain and sends it to a node that node will switch to a fake chain of headers. After switching the node will ask for blocks that are represented by the fake headers but those blocks will never be received so the node will stay out of sync with the network until the moment network eventually produces a longer chain and the node switches back.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With our C# node implementation, if an attacker constructs a fake chain of headers that has more work than the valid chain and sends it to a node, that node will switch to the fake chain of headers. After switching, the node will ask for blocks that are represented by the fake headers but those blocks will never be received. As a result, the node will stay out of sync with the network until the moment the network eventually produces a longer chain and the node switches back.
```

*Therefore it is possible to perform an attack on any node that uses getheaders and keep it out of sync for a long period of time.* 

## Solution abstract overview

> In order to prevent attacks using fake headers we propose construction of proven headers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to prevent attacks using fake headers, we propose the use of proven headers. 
```

New type of network messages needs to be introduced to allow syncing using proven headers -

> 1.  *provhdr* - `ProvenHeadersPayload` which contains list of up to 2000 proven headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  *provhdr* - `ProvenHeadersPayload` which contains a list of up to 2000 proven headers.
```

2. *sendprovhdr* - `SendProvenHeadersPayload` which informs the peer that we are only willing to sync using the proven headers and not the old type of headers.
3. *getprovhdr* - `GetProvenHeadersPayload`  which requests proven headers using a similar mechanism as the `getheaders` protocol message.

## Basic constructs

#### Coinstake age

 `coinstakeAge` is a consensus constant that specifies how old (confirmation-wise) a UTXO has to be in order to be allowed to be used as a coinstake's kernel. 

> This means that if we are synced till the block of height `x` and we receive a proven header that represents a block within the range from `x + 1` to `x + coinstakeAge` then we have enough data to validate the coinstake's kernel because a valid kernel couldn't have been originated in a block with height greater than `coinstakeAge`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that if we are synced up to the block of height `x` and we receive a proven header that represents a block within the range from `x + 1` to `x + coinstakeAge` then we have enough data to validate the coinstake's kernel because a valid kernel couldn't have been originated in a block with height greater than `coinstakeAge`. 
```

It's important to mention that other coinstake transaction data may be fake (non-kernel inputs, fees claimed) but we don't care about this since this data is not related to the chain work. 

#### Trusted base

> We define `trustedBase` as the block up until the node has UTXO set for that it trusts (including that block). In the C# Stratis full node  `trustedBase`  is represented by the consensus tip, and in Stratis C# light wallet node it is currently not represented. More on how trusted base should be represented for the light wallet is in the [trusted base for the light wallet](#trusted-base-for-the-light-wallet) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We define `trustedBase` as the block up until which the node has a UTXO set that it trusts (including that block). In the C# Stratis full node  `trustedBase`  is represented by the consensus tip, and in Stratis C# light wallet node it is currently not represented. More on how trusted base should be represented for the light wallet is in the [trusted base for the light wallet](#trusted-base-for-the-light-wallet) section.
```

#### Long reorg protection

> PoS blockchains similar to Stratis need to have a protection against long reorganizations. Stratis protocol prevents the node from switching to another chain that would replace more than 500 blocks. We denote this parameter as `maxReorg`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PoS blockchains similar to Stratis need to have a protection against long reorganisations. Stratis protocol prevents the node from switching to another chain that would replace more than 500 blocks. We denote this parameter as `maxReorg`.
```

## Structure of proven header

> Proven header consists of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A proven header consists of:
```

> 1. Block header (in the C# node is represented by `BlockHeader` class) which contains merkle tree root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A block header (in the C# node it is represented by the `BlockHeader` class) which contains the merkle tree root.
```

> 2. Block header signature (in the C# node it's represented by `BlockSignature` class), which is signed with the private key which corresponds to coinstake's Second output's public key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. A block header signature (in the C# node it is represented by the `BlockSignature` class), which is signed with the private key which corresponds to the coinstake's second output's public key.
```

> 3. Its coinstake transaction (in the C# node it is represented by `Transaction` class). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Its coinstake transaction (in the C# node it is represented by the `Transaction` class). 
```

> 4. Merkle proof that proves the coinstake tx is included in a block that is being represented by the provided header. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. A Merkle proof that proves the coinstake tx is included in a block that is being represented by the provided header. 
```

   In the C# node the merkle proof can be represented by the `PartialMerkleTree` class.

## Assumptions

> This document is written under assumption that a softfork that changes `coinstakeAge` consensus parameter from 50 to 500 is activated for Stratis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document is written under the assumption that a softfork that changes `coinstakeAge` consensus parameter from 50 to 500 is activated for Stratis.
```

> Solution proposed in this document should be implemented for the C# nodes only when miners that control at least 51% of all stake adopted the softfork. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The solution proposed in this document should be implemented for the C# nodes only when miners that control at least 51% of all stake adopt the softfork. 
```

#### Reasons behind changing coinstakeAge

If the `coinstakeAge < maxReorg` then it is possible to create a valid coinstake kernel which will use UTXO originated in a block within the bounds of long reorg protection. Such coinstake can't always be validated with a small proof.

Alternative solutions with longer proofs have been explored as well but they always introduce new attack vectors and additional complexity to the code which makes those solutions inferior to just implementing syncing with the *inv* messages.

 

## Changes required for the C# node

In this section changes that will be required for the C# node to support syncing with *proven headers* are covered. 

#### Handshake

Also after the handshake is completed *sendprovhdr* message should be sent instead of *sendheaders*.

> *sendprovhdr* message is a message just as *sendheaders* is and it is just another message type to distinguish between those two. Also it will contain height from which we prefer having proven headers over normal headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*sendprovhdr* message is a message just as *sendheaders* is and it is just another message type to distinguish between those two. It will also contain the height from which we prefer having proven headers over normal headers.
```

#### Storing chain of proven headers

> Currently on the C# node we have ChainRepository which stores chain of headers. It should be extended to store the full *proven headers* chain for blocks that were created after the `activationHeight`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently on the C# node we have ChainRepository which stores the chain of headers. It should be extended to store the full *proven headers* chain for blocks that were created after the `activationHeight`.
```

> Also it will be reasonable to merge the `StakeChain` with the ChainRepository database. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, it will be reasonable to merge the `StakeChain` with the ChainRepository database. 
```

#### C# nodes syncing from StratisX nodes

Syncing from StratisX nodes is currently done using *headers* message and StratisX nodes won't be updated to be able to understand *provenHeaders* messages. 

However if issue [1156](https://github.com/stratisproject/StratisBitcoinFullNode/issues/1156) is resolved then we can allow using old headers messages for synchronization up to the last checkpoint. But we still need C# nodes to be able to sync from the StratisX nodes after the last checkpoint.

Before the soft fork is activated syncing after the last checkpoint from the StratisX can be done using one of the following options:

1. Allow syncing only from C# nodes or whitelisted StratisX nodes (list of those nodes can be requested from the seed nodes)- we suggest this option to be implemented. 
2. Partially implement syncing using *Inv* messages without using *headers* protocol at all (this would emulate the behavior of early bitcoin nodes version).

> If the maximum outbound connections limit is reached and there are less than 1 outbound connection to the C# node that supports syncing with the *proven headers* one random connection should be dropped to allow node continue making connection attempts in order to find a C# node that support *proven headers*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the maximum outbound connections limit is reached and there are less than 1 outbound connection to the C# node that supports syncing with the *proven headers*, one random connection should be dropped to allow the node to continue making connection attempts in order to find a C# node that supports *proven headers*. 
```

##### List of rules to validate the blocks and advance with trusted base

1. Check if every single transaction that is included in the block is valid according to the following rules (it is suggested to divide those checks to expensive and inexpensive and do them separately, inexpensive first):

   1. Check tx timestamp <= header timestamp
   2. Make an iterative overflow check of all outputs and inputs (see `CheckTransaction` in C# node's code)
   3. Check that inputs list doesn't contain any duplicated UTXOs
   4. Check if the transaction is finalized
   5. If tx is coinbase it's outputs are zero
   6. If tx's input was originated in coinstake or coinbase- check maturity
   7. Check if input tx's timestamp is older than tx timestamp
   8. Sum of all inputs has to be greater than the sum of all outputs (the difference between them is the total amount of fees that can be claimed in this block)
   9. Check if transaction fee >= minimal fee
   10. Check all inputs for a tx are valid UTXOs
   11. Verify `SciptSig` of all inputs
   12. Mark all inputs as spent in the coinview

> 2.  Check the merle root

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  Check the merkle root
```

> 3. Check that coinstake reward is <= fees + block subsidy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Check that the coinstake reward is <= fees + block subsidy
```
